The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Project Gutenberg FAQ 2002, by Jim Tinsley

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: The Project Gutenberg FAQ 2002

Author: Jim Tinsley

Release Date: October, 2005 [EBook #9109]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on September 7, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: iso-8859-1

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROJECT GUTENBERG FAQ 2002 ***




The Project Gutenberg FAQ 2002

by Jim Tinsley



Important: This file is posted to the Project Gutenberg archives
not as a current guide, more as a historical reference. I hope
that future FAQs will be posted, as the project evolves, but
this one is of its time.

If you want the most up-to-date information from PG, please
see the current version of the FAQ, from the Project Gutenberg
site, or, at the time of posting, at:

    http://ibiblio.org/gutenberg/faq/gutfaq.txt
    or
    http://ibiblio.org/gutenberg/faq/gutfaq.htm




Acknowledgements

Writing a FAQ for an organization of fanatical proofreaders has
its ups and downs! I'd like to thank all those who corrected
my facts and my typos, and especially the people who pointed out
the lack of clarity in certain answers. The remaining errors and
opacity are all mine.



Preface to the archive edition

Ironically, Project Gutenberg, which preserves the writings of
others, doesn't have much written history itself. There are
scraps of e-mails and guidelines, but many newsletters and other
internal writings before 1996 have gone to the great bit-bucket
in the sky.

The later half of the '90s marked a graceful blooming of Project
Gutenberg's growth. Three related technical factors contributed: the
explosion in home PCs brought standardization, which made it easy
for non-techies to install scanners, which, in response to the new
demand, became plentiful and cheap. And, of course, these years saw
the rise in popularity of the Internet, which has always been PG's
main channel of communication and distribution.

However, while PG's production expanded geometrically, at Moore's
Law rates, there were barriers to participation. Most volunteers had
to find an eligible book, scan or type it, and proof the resulting
text all by themselves. This was and is a fairly significant amount
of work: 40 painstaking hours would be a typical commitment for one
book.

Beyond that, simply learning the mechanics of producing e-texts
could be a serious challenge for newcomers. Nearly all internal
PG communication, except for the Newsletter, was by private e-mail,
and instructions had to be repeated many times to individual new
volunteers, all of whom showed up with great good will, but most of
whom vanished after a week or two.

Michael Hart was unstinting in his editing of incoming texts and
handling questions by e-mail, but any one person has only so many
hours.

The Directors of Production at the time -- Sue Asscher, Dianne Bean,
John Bickers and David Price -- served as contact points for advice
and help, made enormous efforts of production themselves, and tried
to share the scanned texts among new volunteers for proofing. They
made a huge contribution to building community in PG.

Pietro Di Miceli set up a web site for the project in 1996, and with
the popularization of the Web (as opposed to the Internet), this became
a beacon for readers and new volunteers.

All of these people reached out to willing volunteers, drew them in,
helped them, encouraged them. The Project and all of the readers of
the books, now and in the future, owe these people a great debt.
Without them, Project Gutenberg could not have achieved what it has.
But still, for the most part, each volunteer worked alone.


In 1999, I wrote, in response to an offer to volunteer:

    I think I can best answer your offer, and many others like it,
    by giving an extended description of what actually happens in
    the making of PG texts, and why it's often not easy to get
    started.

    There is no agenda, no master list of tasks ready to be given to
    volunteers. This is often the hardest thing to get across to new
    volunteers. I know I waited quite a while after volunteering for
    someone to give me a job to do before I realized it.


    Exactly five steps are normally performed in the publishing of
    an e-text.

    1. Someone, somewhere gets a public-domain copy of a text they
       want to contribute.

    2. That volunteer confirms its PD status by sending TP&V to
       Michael, and getting copyright clearance.

    3. Someone, usually the same volunteer, scans and corrects the
       text, or, if skilled in typing, types the book into an e-text.

    4. Someone, often a different volunteer, second-proofs the
       e-text, removing the smaller errors.

    5. The e-text is sent to Michael for posting.


    There are three barriers which make it difficult for most people
    to contribute:

    1. Getting a PD book.

    2. People without scanners and typing skills have no way of
       turning a book into an e-text.

    3. Even with a scanner, turning a book into an e-text is not
       easy or quick.

    Since, generally, people who have a PD book don't just want to
    send it off to a stranger for scanning, the people who produce
    e-texts have to get over all three of these barriers. This is
    the bottleneck in production. It's relatively easy to get an
    e-text second-proofed; making it in the first place is the
    hardest part. You need to have a book, the means to turn it into
    an e-text and the time and will to do it.

    After that comes second proofing. There are two problems here.
    One is that there may not be enough texts for all the people who
    want to second-proof; the other is that a lot of beginners just
    abandon texts given to them for second-proofing, which holds up
    the process and is discouraging for others. So a lot of
    volunteers do their own second-proofing or send their texts to
    established contacts with a track record of finishing the job,
    rather than making them available to newbies. The Directors of
    Production do serve as contact points, and at any given moment
    may have some texts for proofing, but they can only distribute
    the texts that have already been made.


    With that explanation out of the way, I can better address your
    question of what you can do.


    Second-proofing is an easy way to start, but material isn't just
    waiting for you. If you want to look for some, post your offer
    here and wait a week or so. If no takers by then, e-mail Michael
    and ask if there are any texts available; he may be able to
    refer you to a Director of Production who has something current.
    You may not get an e-text immediately, but you will get one. Of
    course, you can also look here for offers of e-texts ready to
    proof.

    Your other option is to take on a book yourself. In your case,
    you already have a scanner, so you are equipped to become a
    producer. You need to find a PD book.

    Getting PD books means finding and borrowing or buying them. You
    can do this through used bookshops, libraries or book sites on
    the Internet. I mention a few net sites in the FAQ in the link
    below. I get all my books through them, since they make it easy
    for me to find the books I want. Prices range from $5 up to (in
    my case) about $30.

    The best advice I can offer here is: pick a book that you _want_
    to contribute, and a book you'll enjoy working with--you'll be
    living with it up close and personal for quite a while.



In March and April of 1999, Pietro created the PG Volunteers'
WWWBoard and Greg Newby set up the mailing list gutvol-d, and, for
the first time, volunteers who hadn't been introduced to each other
by Michael or the Directors could meet online and communicate
directly. A few FAQs and HOWTOs were written, covering the basics,
the nitty-gritty of producing books. All of this activity made it
much easier for people to get involved, and the Project experienced
a new influx of interested volunteers. Improved OCR software was
also a factor at this time: in response to the commoditization of
scanners, there was rapid improvement in the quality of OCR, and
better OCR made for easier production of e-texts.  More work was
shared out in co-operative proofing experiments.

It was in this new, expansive atmosphere, with ideas flooding in
from enthusiasts newly energized by the project, that Charles Franks
(Charlz) came up with the idea of a web site that would serve to
distribute the work of proofing a book among many volunteers. But
not only did he think of the concept; he went ahead and did it!

In April 2000, Charlz first requested comments on his idea in
a post on the Volunteers' WWWBoard, and by the end of September,
the first e-texts were queueing up on the production line.

On October 9th, Charlz wrote:

    Number of pages proofed by date:

    2nd    6
    3rd    6
    4th   20  <-- Newsletter
    5th   27
    6th   25
    7th   29
    8th   30
    9th   45!! (and the day ain't over yet)

(The "Newsletter" is a reference to the site being mentioned in
the PG Newsletter on October 4th, 2000).

Distributed Proofreaders, or DP, simply kept growing from there, as
Charlz kept scanning and adding more books and features and
proofers, and its simple organic growth produced 600 e-texts in two
years, but when Charlz asked for more help on Slashdot, a popular
technical news site, on November 8th, 2002, the response blew the
roof off! The pages per day figure jumped from 1,000 to about 10,000
for a while, then settled down at its current 4,000. 4,000 pages,
even given that each page is proofed twice, is a lot of pages. 2,000
produced pages per day is about five full books per day. DP has
formed the backbone of PG's production ever since. Whatever the
future of DP's production, its effect on shared knowledge and
resources, and the communication and community it has built, ensures
that Project Gutenberg will never be the same again.


I began writing this FAQ in March 2002, and was essentially finished
around December 2002. It sat around, with a few tweaks here and
there in response to comments, until the start of September 2003.

Today, it is a useful guide to Project Gutenberg norms and practices.
By the time you read it, it may be ancient history ("Hey, Grandad,
did you REALLY scan things from paper? Why didn't you use your
brain implant?" :-) But it is one record of How Things Were in
Project Gutenberg during this time of change.

jim
September 7th, 2003.








Project Gutenberg FAQ 2002

I have a question not answered in this FAQ. How do I ask it?

If it's about how to produce a text, the Volunteers' Board at
<http://www.gutenberg.net/vol/wwwboard/> is generally the best
place to ask.

If it's a question of active interest to the general body of
volunteers, you can ask it on the gutvol-d mailing list. See
<http://www.gutenberg.net/subs.html> for joining it.

For other questions, you should check our Contact Information page at
<http://www.gutenberg.net/contactinfo.html> and e-mail the appropriate
person.


       About Project Gutenberg:

G.1.   What is Project Gutenberg?
G.2.   Where did Project Gutenberg come from?
G.3.   What has Project Gutenberg achieved?
G.4.   Who runs Project Gutenberg?
G.5.   How many people are in Project Gutenberg?
G.6.   How can I contact Project Gutenberg?
G.7.   How can I help Project Gutenberg?
G.8.   How can I keep in touch with what Project Gutenberg is doing?
G.9.   What is the relationship between Project Gutenberg, Projekt
       Gutenberg-DE, Project Gutenberg of Australia, and Project Runeberg?


       About Project Gutenberg publications:

G.10.  Does Project Gutenberg publish only books?
G.11.  What books does Project Gutenberg publish?
G.12.  What other things does Project Gutenberg publish?
G.13.  How does Project Gutenberg choose books to publish?
G.14.  What languages does Project Gutenberg publish in?
G.15.  Why don't you have any / many books about history, geography, science,
G.16.  Why don't you have any books by Steven King, Tom Clancy,
       Tolkien, etc.?
G.17.  Why is Project Gutenberg so set on using Plain Vanilla ASCII?



Readers' FAQ

       About Finding eBooks:

R.1.   How can I find an eBook I'm looking for?
R.2.   Can I get a complete list of Project Gutenberg eBooks?
R.3.   How can I download a PG text that hasn't been cataloged yet?
R.4.   You don't have the eBook I'm looking for. Can you help me find it?
R.5.   Where else can I go to get eBooks?
R.6.   I see some eBooks in several places on the Net. Do different
       people really re-create the same eBooks?


       About Using the Web Site:

R.7.   Why couldn't I reach your site? (or: Why is your site slow?)
R.8.   I get an error when I try to download a book.
R.9.   I searched for a book I know is in Project Gutenberg, but got no
       results.
R.10.  Can I copy your website, or your website materials?
R.11.  Your site doesn't look right in my browser.
       I clicked on a button, and nothing happened.
R.12.  What does that thing about "Select FTP Site" mean?
R.13.  What exactly is an FTP site anyway?
R.14.  Can I become an FTP mirror?
R.15.  Can I make a private FTP mirror for my school, library or
       organization?
R.16.  When I clicked on the file I want, nothing happened.
R.17.  How many texts are downloaded through the web site?
R.18.  What are the most popular books?


       About Downloading and Using Project Gutenberg eBooks:

R.19.  Should I download a ZIP or a TXT file?
R.20.  I've got a ZIP file. What do I do with it?
R.21.  I tried to unzip my file, but it said the file was corrupt, or
       damaged.
R.22.  I see gibberish onscreen when I click on a book.
R.23.  Can I download and read your books?
R.24.  What am I allowed to do with the books I download?
R.25.  Does Project Gutenberg know who downloads their books?
R.26.  I've found some obvious typos in a Project Gutenberg text.
       How should I report them?
R.27.  I've found some obvious typos in a Project Gutenberg text.
       Who should I report them to?
R.28.  I've reported some typos. What will happen next?
R.29.  I've got the text file, and I can read it, but it seems to be
       double-spaced or it has control characters like ^J or ^M at
       the end of every line.
R.30.  When I print out the text file, each line runs over the edge
       of the page and looks bad.
R.31.  I can read the text file, but a few characters appear as black
       squares, or gibberish.
R.32.  Can I get a handheld device for reading PG texts? Which device
       should I get?
R.33.  How can I read a PG eBook on my PDA (Palm, iPaq, Rocket . . .)


       About the Files:

R.34.  What types of files are there, and how do I read them?
R.35.  What do the filenames of the texts mean?
R.36.  What is the difference within PG between an "edition" and a "version"?
R.37.  What is the difference between an "etext" and an "eBook"?
R.38.  What are the "Etext/Ebook numbers" on the texts?
R.39.  What do the month and year on the text mean?



Copyright FAQ

C.1.   What is copyright?
C.2.   Does copyright differ from country to country? From state to state?
C.3.   What are the copyright laws outside the U.S.?
C.4.   Why does Project Gutenberg advise only on U.S. copyright issues?
C.5.   I don't live in the U.S. Do these rules apply to me?
C.6.   What is the public domain?
C.7.   What can I do with a text that is in the public domain?
C.8.   How does a book enter the public domain?
C.9.   How does a copyright lapse?
C.10.  What books are in the public domain?
C.11.  My book says that it's "Copyright 1894". Is it in the public domain?
C.12.  How can a copyright owner release a work into the public domain?
C.13.  When is an author not the owner of a copyright on his or her works?
C.14.  What does Project Gutenberg mean by "eligible"?
C.15.  I have a manuscript from 1900. Is it eligible?
C.16.  How come my paper book of Shakespeare says it's "Copyright 1988"?
C.17.  What makes a "new copyright"?
C.18.  I have a 1990 book that I know was originally written in 1840,
       but the publisher is claiming a new copyright. What should I do?
C.19.  I have a 1990 reprint of an 1831 original. Is it eligible?
C.20.  I have a text that I know was based on a pre-1923 book, but I
       don't have the title page. Can I submit it to PG?
C.21.  How does Project Gutenberg "clear" books for copyright?
C.22.  I want to produce a particular book. Will it be copyright cleared?
C.23.  I have some extra material (images, introduction, preface, missing
       chapter) that should go into an existing PG text. Do I have to
       copyright-clear my edition before submitting it?
C.24.  I see some Project Gutenberg eBooks that are copyrighted. What's
       up with that?
C.25.  What are "non-renewed" books?
C.26.  How can I get Project Gutenberg to clear a non-renewed book?



Volunteers' FAQ

       About the Basics:

V.1.   How do I get started as a Project Gutenberg volunteer?
V.2.   What experience do I need to produce or proof a text?
V.3.   How do I produce a text?
V.4.   Do I need any special equipment?
V.5.   Do I need to be able to program?
V.6.   I am a programmer, and I would like to help by programming.
V.7.   What does a Gutenberg volunteer actually do?
V.8.   Can I produce a book in my own language?
V.9.   Does it have to be a book? Can I produce pieces from a magazine
       or other periodical?
V.10.  Do I _have_ to produce in plain ASCII text?
V.11.  Where do I sign up as a volunteer?
V.12.  How do PG volunteers communicate, keep in touch, or co-ordinate work?
V.13.  Where can I find a list of books that need proofing?
V.14.  Is there a list of books that Project Gutenberg wants?
V.15.  I have one book I'd like to contribute. Can I do just that without
       signing up?


       About production:

V.16.  How does a text get produced?
V.17.  How long must a text be to qualify for PG?
V.18.  What books are eligible?
V.19.  Are reprints or facsimiles eligible?
V.20.  What is the difference between a reprint and a facsimile?
V.21.  What is the difference between a reprint and a "new edition"?
V.22.  What book should I work on?
V.23.  I have a book in mind, but I don't have an eligible copy.
V.24.  Where can I find an eligible book?
V.25.  What is "TP&V"?
V.26.  What is "Posting"?
V.27.  I think I've found an eligible book that I'd like to work on.
       What do I do next?
V.28.  What books are currently being worked on?
V.29.  How do I find out if my book is already on-line somewhere?
V.30.  My book is not on the In-Progress list, and I can't find it on-line.
V.31.  My book is on-line, but not in Project Gutenberg. What should I do?
V.32.  My book is already on-line in Project Gutenberg, but my printed book
       is different from the version already archived. Can I add my version?
V.33.  I see a book that was being worked on three years ago. Is anyone still
       working on it?
V.34.  I've decided which book to produce. How do I tell PG
       I'm working on it?
V.35.  I have a two- or three-volume set. Should I submit them as one text,
       or one text for each volume?
V.36.  I have one physical book, with multiple works in it (like a
       collection of plays). Should I submit each text separately?
V.37.  How do I get copyright clearance?
V.38.  I have a two- or three-volume set. Do I have to get a separate
       clearance on each physical book?
V.39.  I have one physical book, with multiple works in it (like a
       collection of plays). Do I have to get a separate clearance
       for each work?
V.40.  Who will check up on my progress? When?
V.41.  How long should it take me to complete a book?
V.42.  I want/don't want my name published on my e-text
V.43.  I'd like to put a copy of my finished e-text, or another
       Gutenberg text, on my own web page.
V.44.  I've scanned, edited and proofed my text. How do I find someone
       to second-proof it?
V.45.  I've gone over and over my text. I can't find any more errors,
       and I'm sick of looking at it. What should I do now?
V.46.  Where and how can I send my text for posting?
V.47.  What is the "Credits Line"?
V.48.  How soon after I send it will my text be posted?
V.49.  I found a problem with my posted text. What do I do?
V.50.  Someone has e-mailed me about my posted text, pointing out errors.
V.51.  Someone has e-mailed me about my posted text, thanking me.


       About Proofing:

V.52.  What role does proofing play in Project Gutenberg?
V.53.  What is Distributed Proofing?
V.54.  What do I need to proof an e-text?
V.55.  Do I need to have a paper copy of the book I'm proofing?
V.56.  What's the difference between "first proof" and "second proof"?
V.57.  What do I do with an e-text sent to me for proofing?
V.58.  What kinds of errors will I have to correct?
V.59.  How long does it take to proof an e-text?
V.60.  Are there any special techniques for proofing?
V.61.  What actually happens during a proof?


       About Net searching:

V.62.  I've found an eligible text elsewhere on the Net, but it's not
       in the PG archives. Can I just submit it to PG?
V.63.  I've found an eligible text elsewhere on the Net, but it's not
       in the PG archives. Why should I submit it to PG?
V.64.  I have already scanned or typed a book; it's on my web site.
       How can I get it included in the Gutenberg archives?
V.65.  I have already scanned or typed a book; it's on my web site.
       The world can already access it. Why should I add it to the
       Gutenberg archives?
V.66.  I have already scanned or typed a book, but it's not in plain text
       format. Can I submit it to PG?


       About author-submitted eBooks:

V.67.  I've written a book. Will PG publish it?
V.68.  I have translated a classic book from one language to another.
       Will PG publish my translation?
V.69.  OK, this is one of the cases where PG will publish it.
       What do I do next?
V.70.  I hold the copyright on a book. Can I release it to the public domain?
V.71.  I hold the copyright on a book. Do I have to release the book
       into the public domain for Project Gutenberg to publish it?
V.72.  I hold the copyright on a book, and would like Project Gutenberg
       to publish it. Can I choose what rights to assign?


       About what goes into the texts:

V.73.  Why does PG format texts the way it does?


       About the characters you use:

V.74.  What characters can I use?
V.75.  What is ASCII?
V.76.  So what is ISO-8859? What is Codepage 437? What is Codepage 1252?
       What is MacRoman?
V.77.  What is Unicode?
V.78.  What is Big-5?
V.79.  What are "8-bit" and "7-bit" texts?
V.80.  I have an English text with some quotations from a language that
       needs accents--what should I do about the accents?
V.81.  I have some Greek quotations in my book. How can I handle them?
V.82.  I want to produce a book in a language like Spanish or French
       with accented characters. What should I do?


       About the formatting of a text file:

V.83.  How long should I make my lines of text?
V.84.  Why should I break lines at all? Why not make the text as one
       line per paragraph, and let the reader wrap it?
V.85.  Why use a CR/LF at end of line?
V.86.  One space or two at the end of a sentence?
V.87.  How do I indicate paragraphs?
V.88.  Should I indent the start of every paragraph?
V.89.  Are there any places where I should indent text?
V.90.  Can I use tabs (the TAB key) to indent?
V.91.  How should I treat dashes (hyphens) between words?
V.92.  How should I treat dashes replacing letters?
V.93.  What about hyphens at end of line?
V.94.  What should I do with italics?
V.95.  Yes, but I have a long passage of my book in italics! I can't
       really CAPITALIZE or _otherwise_ /mark/ all that text, can I?
V.96.  Should I capitalize the first word in each chapter?
V.97.  What is a Transcriber's Note? When should I add one?
V.98.  Should I keep page numbers in the e-text?
V.99.  In the exceptional cases where I keep page numbers, how should
       I format them?
V.100. Should I keep Tables of Contents?
V.101. Should I keep Indexes and Glossaries?
V.102. How do I handle a break from one scene to another, where the
       book uses blank lines, or a row of asterisks?
V.103. How should I treat footnotes?
V.104. My book leaves a space before punctuation like semicolons,
       question marks, exclamation marks and quotes. Should I do
       the same?
V.105. My book leaves a space in the middle of contracted words like
       "do n't", "we 'll" and "he 's". Should I do the same?
V.106. How should I handle tables?
V.107. How should I format letters or journal entries?
V.108. What can I do with the British pound sign?
V.109. What can I do with the degree symbol?
V.110. How should I handle . . . ellipses?
V.111. How should I handle chapter and section headings?
V.112. My book has advertisements at the end. Should I keep them?
V.113. Can I keep Lists of Illustrations, even when producing a
       plain text file?
V.114. Can I include the captions of Illustrations, even when producing
       a plain text file?
V.115. Can I include images with my text file?


       About formatting poetry:

V.116. I'm producing a book of poetry. How should I format it?
V.117. I'm producing a novel with some short quotations from poems.


       About formatting plays:

V.118. How should I format Act and Scene headings?
V.119. How should I format stage directions?
V.120. How should I format blank verse?


       About some typical formatting issues:

V.121. Sample 1: Typical formatting issues of a novel.
V.122. Sample 2: Typical formatting issues of non-fiction
V.123. Sample 3: Typical formatting issues of poetry
V.124. Sample 4: Typical formatting issues of plays


       About problems with the printed books:

V.125. I found some distasteful or offensive passages in a book I'm
       producing. Should I omit them?
V.126. Some paragraphs in my book, where a character is speaking,
       have quotes at the start, but not at the end. Should I close
       those quotes?
V.127. The spelling in my book is British English (colour, centre).
       Should I change these to American spellings?
V.128. I'm nearly sure that some words in my printed book are typos.
       Should I change them?
V.129. Having investigated what looks like a typo, I find it isn't.
       Do I need to do anything?
V.130. Aarrgh! Some pages are missing! Do I have to abandon the book?
V.131. Some words are spelled inconsistently in my book (e.g. sometimes
       "surprise", sometimes "surprize"). Should I make them consistent?



Word Processing FAQ

W.1.   What's the difference between an editor and a word processor?
W.2.   Should I use an editor or a word processor?
W.3.   Which editor or word processor should I use?
W.4.   How can I make my word processor easier to work with for plain text?
W.5.   What is the difference between proportional and non-proportional
       fonts?
W.6.   I can't get words in a table or poem to line up under each other.


       About using MS-Word:

W.7.   I've edited my book in Word - how do I save it as plain text?
W.8.   Quotes look wrong when I save a Word document as plain text.
W.9.   Dashes look wrong when I save a Word document as plain text.
W.10.  I saved my Word document as HTML, but the HTML looks terrible.



Scanning FAQ

S.1.   What is a scanner?
S.2.   What types of scanners are there?
S.3.   Which scanner should I get?
S.4.   What is ADF?
S.5.   Should I get ADF?
S.6.   What's a "TWAIN driver" and why do I need one?
S.7.   How do I scan a book?
S.8.   My book won't open flat enough for a good scan, and I don't
       want to cut the pages.
S.9.   How long does it take to scan a book?
S.10.  What scanner settings are best?
S.11.  Can I use a digital camera in place of a scanner?
S.12.  What is OCR?
S.13.  What differences are there between OCR packages?
S.14.  How accurate should OCR be?
S.15.  Which OCR package should I get?
S.16.  What types of mistakes do OCR packages typically make?
S.17.  Why am I getting a lot of mistakes in my OCRed text?
S.18.  I got an OCR package bundled with my scanner. Is it good enough
       to use?
S.19.  I want to include some images with a HTML version. How should I
       scan them?
S.20.  I want to include some images with a HTML version. What type of
       image should I use?
S.21.  Will PG store scanned page images of my book?


HTML FAQ

H.1.   Can I submit a HTML version of my text?
H.2.   Why should I make a HTML version?
H.3.   Can I submit a HTML version without a plain ASCII version?
H.4.   What are the PG rules for HTML texts?
H.5.   Can I use Javascript or other scripting languages in my HTML?
H.6.   Should I make my HTML edition all on one page, or split it into
       multiple linked pages?
H.7.   How can I check that I haven't made mistakes in coding my HTML?
H.8.   Can I submit a HTML or other format of somebody else's text?
H.9.   How big can the images be in a HTML file?
H.10.  The images I've scanned are too big for inclusion in HTML.
       What can I do about it?
H.11.  Can I include decorative images I've made or found?
H.12.  How can I make a plain text version from a HTML file?
H.13.  How can I make a HTML version from my plain text file?


Programs and Programming FAQ

P.1.   What useful programs are available for Project Gutenberg work?
P.2.   What programs could I write to help with PG work?


Formats FAQ

F.1.   What formats does Project Gutenberg publish?
F.2.   What is, and how do I make or use various formats?


Volunteers' Voices - Volunteers talk about PG

       Amy Zelmer
       Ben Crowder
       Col Choat
       Dagny
       Gardner Buchanan
       Jim Tinsley
       John Mamoun
       Ken Reeder
       Lynn Hill
       Sandra Laythorpe
       Tony Adam
       Tonya Allen
       Walter Debeuf


Bookmarks - web pages commonly referred to in the FAQ

B.1.   Project Gutenberg
B.2.   Distributed Proofing Sites
B.3.   Other On-Line eBook Pages
B.4.   Lists of Suggested Books to Transcribe
B.5.   Finding Paper Books On-Line





About Project Gutenberg:



G.1. What is Project Gutenberg?

Project Gutenberg is a volunteer effort to digitize, archive, and
distribute cultural works.



G.2. Where did Project Gutenberg come from?

In 1971, Michael Hart was given $100,000,000 worth of computer time on
a mainframe of the era. Trying to figure out how to put these very
expensive hours to good use, he envisaged a time when there would be
millions of connected computers, and typed in the Declaration of
Independence (all in upper case--there was no lower case available!).
His idea was that everybody who had access to a computer could have a
copy of the text. Now, 31 years later, his copy of the Declaration of
Independence (with lower-case added!) is still available to everyone
on the Internet.

During the 70s, he added some more classic American texts, and through
the 80s worked on the Bible and the collected works of Shakespeare.
That edition of Shakespeare was never released, due to copyright law
changes, but others followed.

Starting in 1991, Project Gutenberg began to take its current form,
with many different texts and defined targets. The target for 1991 was
one book a month. 1992's target was two books a month. This target
doubled every year through 1996, when it hit 32 books a month.

Today, we have a target of 200 books a month.



G.3. What has Project Gutenberg achieved?

Project Gutenberg is the original, and oldest, etext project on the
Internet, founded in 1971.

In mid-2002, we are not only still going, we have made over 5,000
eBooks available, with a current production target of 200 more each
month.

We have many mirrors (copies) of our archives on all five continents.



G.4. Who runs Project Gutenberg?

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization. Dr. Gregory B. Newby <gbnewby@ils.unc.edu> is our
volunteer CEO. Professor Michael Hart <hart@pobox.com> is our Founder
and Executive Director.

In terms of the day-to-day production of eBooks, our volunteers run
themselves. :-) They produce books, and submit them when completed.
Our Production Directors help with general volunteer issues. The
Posting Team check submitted texts and shepherd them onto our servers.
You can find current contact information for these people on the
Contact Information page at <http://www.gutenberg.net/contactinfo.html>.



G.5. How many people are in Project Gutenberg?

As of mid-2002, there are about 100 active producers, and 200 regular,
active helpers doing tasks like proofing. Something like 1500 people
receive our Newsletter.



G.6. How can I contact Project Gutenberg?

There are lots of ways to contact us, depending on what you want to
talk about. The Contact Info page
<http://www.gutenberg.net/contactinfo.html> on the main web site lists
them.



G.7. How can I help Project Gutenberg?

Donate money! We're an all-volunteer project, and we don't have much
to spend, so even a little goes a long way. Our Donation page
<http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html> tells you how.

Produce a text! Turn an old book into an immortal etext.
The Volunteers' FAQ [V.1] tells you how.



G.8. How can I keep in touch with what Project Gutenberg is doing?

Subscribe to one of the Newsletters--weekly or monthly!

The page <http://www.gutenberg.net/subs.html> gives details of how
to subscribe, unsubscribe and access the archives.



G.9. What is the relationship between Project Gutenberg, Projekt
     Gutenberg-DE, Project Gutenberg of Australia, and Project Runeberg?

These are all entirely separate organizations. Projekt Gutenberg-DE
and Project Gutenberg of Australia use the "Project Gutenberg"
trademark with permission, and they operate within the copyright rules
of their respective countries. Project Runeberg has no specific
connection with Project Gutenberg.




About Project Gutenberg publications:



G.10. Does Project Gutenberg publish only books?

No.

Project Gutenberg also publishes other cultural works like movies and
music, but the bulk of our collection is books.



G.11. What books does Project Gutenberg publish?

Any books that we legally can, and that our volunteers want to work
on.

We cannot publish any texts still in copyright without permission.
This generally means that our texts are taken from books published
pre-1923. (It's more complicated than that, as our Copyright FAQ
explains, but 1923 is a good first rule-of-thumb for the U.S.A.)

So you won't find the latest bestsellers or modern computer books
here. You _will_ find the classic books from the start of this century
and previous centuries, from authors like Shakespeare, Poe, Dante, as
well as well-loved favorites like the Sherlock Holmes stories by Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle, the Tarzan and Mars books of Edgar Rice Burroughs,
Alice's adventures in Wonderland as told by Lewis Carroll, and
thousands of others.

These books are chosen by our volunteers. Simply, a volunteer decides
that a certain book should be in the archives, obtains the book and
does the work necessary to turn it into an e-text. If you're
interested in volunteering, see the Volunteers' FAQ at [V.1] below.



G.12. What other things does Project Gutenberg publish?

We have published some music files, in MIDI and MUS formats. We have
published the Human Genome. We have published pictures of the
prehistoric cave paintings from the south of France. We have published
some video files and some audio files, including a Janis Ian track and
readings from public domain books.



G.13. How does Project Gutenberg choose books to publish?

Project Gutenberg, as such, does not choose books to publish. There is
no central list of works that volunteers are asked to work on.
Individual volunteers choose and produce books according to their own
tastes and values, and the availability (or price!) of the book.



G.14. What languages does Project Gutenberg publish in?

Whatever languages we can! As above, this is decided by what languages
our volunteers choose to work with.



G.15. Why don't you have any / many books about history, geography,
      science, biography, etc.?
      Why aren't there any / more PG books available in French, Spanish,
      German, etc.?

If we can legally publish a book, and it isn't in the archives, it's
because no volunteer has produced it yet. At the moment, we have a
predominance of English language novels because that is what most
people have chosen to work on.

We're always looking for new languages and topics, and always
delighted to see people producing them. If we don't have enough of the
types of books you would like to see, why don't you help us out by
contributing one? If the people interested in a particular area don't
contribute, we'll always be short in that area.



G.16. Why don't you have any books by Steven King, Tom Clancy,
      Tolkien, etc.?

Project Gutenberg can publish only books that are in the public
domain [C.10] unless we have the permission of the copyright holder.
Current bestsellers have not yet entered the public domain, and we're
not likely to get permission from the authors to publish them.



G.17. Why is Project Gutenberg so set on using Plain Vanilla ASCII?

Don't misrepresent us--we support and publish many open formats, but,
yes, we do want to have a plain text version of everything possible.

We're looking at our history, and we're planning for the long
term--the _very_ long term.

Today, Plain Vanilla ASCII can be read, written, copied and printed
by just about every simple text editor on every computer in the world.
This has been so for over thirty years, and is likely to be so for the
foreseeable future. We've seen formats and extended character sets
come and go; plain text stays with us. We can still read Shakespeare's
First Folios, the original Gutenberg Bible, the Domesday Book, and
even the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Rosetta Stone (though we may have
trouble with the language!), but we can't read many files made in
various formats on computer media just 20 years ago.

We're trying to build an archive that will last not only decades,
but _centuries_.

The point of putting works in the PG archive is that they are copied
to many, many public sites and individual computers all over the
world. No single disaster can destroy them; no single government can
suppress them. Long after we're all dead and gone, when the very
concept of an ISP is as quaint as gas streetlamps, when HTML reads
like Middle English, those texts will still be safe, copied, and
available to our descendants.

The PG archive is so valuable, yet free and easily portable, that even
if every current PG volunteer vanished overnight, people around the
world would copy and preserve it.

If the ZIP format loses popularity, and is replaced by better
compression, it will be easy to convert the zip formats automatically
(and we post all plain-text files in unzipped format as well). If hard
drives are replaced by optical memory, it will be easy to copy the
files onto that. If even ASCII is superseded by Unicode or one of its
descendants, it will be possible for our grandchildren to convert it
automatically (and ASCII is included in Unicode anyway).

By contrast, many of us have files saved in proprietary formats from
word-processors only 5 or 10 years old that are already impractical
for us to read. Some of our files produced just a few years ago using
non-ASCII character sets like Codepage 850 are already giving problems
for some readers. Some eBook reader formats launched within the last
few years are already obsolete. We have learned from that experience.

We also encourage other open formats based on plain text, like HTML
and XML, and even occasionally not-so-open ones when simple formatting
isn't enough, but plain text and ASCII is the only format and
character set we're sure of in a rapidly-changing technological
landscape.

Please see also the FAQ [F.1] "What formats does Project Gutenberg
publish?" for more detailed discussion of formats.





Readers' FAQ

About Finding eBooks:



R.1. How can I find an eBook I'm looking for?

For PG books, the simplest way is to go to the home page at
<http://www.gutenberg.net>, type the Author or Title into the
search form, press the "Search" button, and follow the choices.


As of late 2002, there is a full-text search available at
<http://public.ibiblio.org/gsdl/cgi-bin/library.cgi>
where you can search not only for titles and authors, but any
words or phrases you want to look up. For example, entering
"Ample make this bed" and running an "entire books" search for
all words leads you to Poems Of Emily Dickinson, Series Two.


R.2. Can I get a complete list of Project Gutenberg eBooks?

Yes. There are two main options:

GUTINDEX.ALL is the raw list of files posted. You will find it at:
<ftp://ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/GUTINDEX.ALL>

PGWHOLE.TXT is the list of files cataloged. A Zipped version is:
<http://promo.net/gg/pgwhole.zip>

When we post a book, the posting information contains title and
author, eBook number, base filename and schedule year and month.
This raw information goes into GUTINDEX.ALL.

After posting, our catalogers get to work and add more information
--things like full title, subtitle, author birth and death dates,
Library of Congress Classification, full filenames and sizes. When
a book has been cataloged, it is entered onto the website database
so that you can search for it. PGWHOLE.TXT is a summary of the
books in the website database.

People who want to bypass the search on the website and find books
themselves will probably want to use GUTINDEX.ALL, since it doesn't
wait for the cataloging.



R.3. How can I download a PG text that hasn't been cataloged yet?

In short, just browse to:

<http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/>

choose the schedule year of the text (newly-posted texts will usually
be in the latest year) and look down the list to find the filename
you're looking for.

In general, you need to know:

a)  the address of an FTP site
b)  the schedule year of the text you want
c)  the basename of the text you want.

The fastest and safest FTP site to use for this is ftp.ibiblio.org,
which is the first of our two primary posting sites (the other being
ftp.archive.org). We post to these two sites, and then other sites
copy from them at intervals, so with any FTP sites other than these
two, the file may not be available immediately.

You can get the schedule year and basename of the text from its line
in GUTINDEX.ALL. Let's take an example. The file

Mar 2004 The Herd Boy and His Hermit, by C. M. Yonge [#32][hrdbhxxx.xxx]5313

has been posted just a few hours ago as I write this. From the
GUTINDEX entry, the schedule year is 2004, and the basename of the
text is hrdbh.

We divide our texts into directories (folders) based on the schedule
year, so this eBook will be in the directory for 2004, which will be
named something ending in /etext04. All the directories are named
etext plus the last two digits of the year. (Somebody's going to have
to change that convention in about 87 years from now! :-) We currently
have directories starting at 90, running through the 90s and then 00,
01, 02, 03, 04. All eBooks produced before 1991 are in the /etext90
directory, so if you're looking for

Dec 1971 Declaration of Independence                      [whenxxxx.xxx]  1
or
Aug 1989 The Bible, Both Testaments, King James Version   [kjv10xxx.xxx] 10

you should look in /etext90.

As it happens, ibiblio supports both HTTP (web) and FTP access to the
text, so we can just browse to

<http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/>

and choose the 2004 directory from there.

If you want to automate this, you could also use the more direct
address

<ftp://www.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext04/>

The equivalent address for ftp.archive.org is

<ftp://ftp.archive.org/pub/etext/etext04/>

Either way, we see a long page of files, in alphabetical order. Scroll
down to the "H"s and look for hrdbh. We see four files with this
basename:

 hrdbh10.txt
 hrdbh10.zip
 hrdbh10h.htm
 hrdbh10h.zip

This means that both plain text and HTML formats are available,
and you can choose to download them either zipped or uncompressed.
For more detail about conventions for filenames, see the FAQ "What
do the filenames of the texts mean?" [R.35]. The main thing you need
to know is that any file beginning with hrdbh is some format or
edition of this book.

Finally, all you have to do is click on the format you want to
download.



R.4. You don't have the eBook I'm looking for. Can you help me find it?

Sorry, no. We can suggest (see below) some other places to look for
publicly accessible books on the Net, but we can't do the search for
you.



R.5. Where else can I go to get eBooks?

The On-Line Books Page <http://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/> and the
Internet Public Library at <http://www.ipl.org/> are two sites that
specialize in creating a list of all books on-line from any source.
Searching them is a good place to start.

If you're looking for commercial books, like current textbooks or
bestsellers, you're not likely to find them here, since recent books
are not in the public domain. For these, you should look for
commercial booksellers on the Net--any search engine will direct you
to some if you enter search terms like "shop ebook".



R.6. I see some eBooks in several places on the Net. Do different
     people really re-create the same eBooks?

It does happen, but mostly by accident. Anyone experienced in eBook
creation will first search the usual places to see whether anyone else
has already transcribed the book they're interested in. If it has been
transcribed, they will not duplicate the effort.

Etexts that are in the public domain very often float around the Net
for years--stored in a gopher server here, posted to Usenet there,
held on someone's local computer for a year or two and then
reformatted as HTML and uploaded to a web site somewhere else. And
this is good, because we want texts to be copied as widely as
possible.

Public domain eBooks are fair game for anyone to copy, correct, mark
up, package and post: that's what being in the public domain means.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often quickly copied and reformatted, and
posted on other sites like Blackmask at <http://www.blackmask.com>.

If you find an eBook in many different places, the odds are good that
it came from one original source, and was copied around.

It does sometimes happen that people duplicate the transcription of
books already made into text. Sometimes it's because they didn't find
the version already made. Sometimes they have a different edition, and
want to transcribe that. Mostly, though, we all try not to do more
work than we have to.




About Using the Web Site:



R.7. Why couldn't I reach your site? (or: Why is your site slow?)

This isn't common, but it happens. Project Gutenberg is a very busy
site, probably one of the busiest non-commercial sites on the Web, and
sometimes the amount of traffic causes a slowdown.

There may also be a bottleneck somewhere else between you and the
site. If at first you don't succeed, _don't tell us_, just try, try
again. The correct address is either:

http://promo.net/pg/
              or
http://www.gutenberg.net/



R.8. I get an error when I try to download a book.

We do not keep e-text files on this site. Instead, many FTP sites
throughout the world hold the whole Project Gutenberg archive of
texts. An FTP site is just a computer on the Internet that specializes
in holding files for download and sending them to people on request.
You can find a list of FTP sites that hold Gutenberg texts at
<http://www.gutenberg.net/list.html>.

When you're searching or browsing for titles and authors, you're on
this Project Gutenberg site, but when you click on the book to
download it, you are connected to an FTP site. At the time you click
on the filename, your browser contacts an FTP site and tries to
download the file from there. If you get an error, it could be because
the FTP site is busy, or because there's a network traffic bottleneck
between you and that FTP site, or because the text you're looking for
is missing from that FTP site.

Usually, the easiest solution is to choose another FTP site to
download your text from. Go to the Search page, choose a different FTP
site, and search again for your text.

Tip: You should always try to choose the FTP site closest to you. Not
only are you helping to minimize Net traffic by choosing a nearby
site, but your file will download faster!

If all else fails, note the year and the filename of the book you
want, choose an FTP site from this list and click on one of them. Then
browse your way through the listings to the file you want.

For example, if you find "Lady Susan" by Jane Austen, you will see
that it was published by Gutenberg in 1997, and its filename is
lsusn10.txt, so browse to one of the FTP sites, choose the directory
called etext97 and click (or right-click and Save, depending on your
browser) on the file lsusn10.txt.



R.9. I searched for a book I know is in Project Gutenberg, but got no
     results.

First go to the Advanced Search page. Sometimes you may miss in
searching because of alternative spellings, so try searching
separately using just one word in Author or Title. Read the Search
Tips.

If that fails, you can Browse through the site catalog. Let's say
you're looking for "The Wandering Jew" by Eugene Sue.

Go to the PG Home page:  <http://www.gutenberg.net/>

Once on this page, click on: "Browse" in "Browse by Author or Title"

You are then brought to a new page, asking you to select an "FTP
site". Further details on how and why to choose an "FTP Site" are
available on this page.

Select an FTP Site from the Selection List available at the bottom of
the page, then click on "Select".

You get a new page, Click on "S", initial for "Sue, Eugene"

You should now see a list of all of the Authors whose Last name starts
with "S". Scroll down till you find the direct links to the Sue,
Eugene works.

Click on the work you are interested to, then click on the file link
found on the page you were brought to, Etext Card ID -3987- when
selecting the work, as immediately above.

On this page, above the teaser, there are two working links:

DOWNLOAD:

Click on the link of your choice in order to get the book.

If you can't find your text either way, the book has not been
cataloged. The site catalog always lags behind the postings, since we
need to collect extra information about the book and the author before
it goes into the full catalog. If you know that the book has been
posted recently, and maybe hasn't made it into the catalog yet, read
the FAQ "How can I download a PG text that hasn't been cataloged yet?"

If even this doesn't help, don't despair! We don't have it, but it may
be elsewhere on the Web. Go to the major search engines and try there.
You can also try looking in the Book Search section of The On-Line
Books Page <http://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/> or the Internet
Public Library <http://www.ipl.org>, and if you have no luck with
that, you might be able to find it listed as being In Progress
somewhere on their Books In Progress and Requested page at
<http://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/in-progress.html>.



R.10. Can I copy your website, or your website materials?

No.

Keeping the PG site updated with the latest e-text releases is an
ongoing job, and our experience is that people, however
well-intentioned, do not keep copies up to date. We want there to be
one clear source for people seeking the latest Project Gutenberg
information, and we think that having a lot of out-of-date copies and
partial copies scattered around the net would be a bad thing.

We welcome mirrors and copies of our e-texts, in new FTP sites [R.14],
but the main web site itself is copyrighted and may not be copied.



R.11. Your site doesn't look right in my browser.
      I clicked on a button, and nothing happened.

We take a lot of trouble to ensure that our website uses only valid,
standard HTML, and we're not even slightly tempted to use glitzy
features that look good in one browser but don't work in another, so
we can promise you that our site is not the problem.

The site uses Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), a W3C standard since 1996.
Some older browsers have a buggy implementation of CSS, and this can
cause some things to appear off-kilter. If your browser is even older,
or doesn't know about CSS at all (as in the case of Lynx, for
example) it should have no problem.

If you actually clicked on a button, like the Search button or the
Post button on the Volunteers' Web Board page, and nothing happened,
you might be behind a proxy or web filter that doesn't like you making
POST requests. If you have a web filter switched on, turn it off,
reload the page and try again.



R.12. What does that thing about "Select FTP Site" mean?

Our texts are not actually held on the website. The website just holds
an index; the files themselves are held on many sites throughout the
world, called FTP sites. When you have found the book you're looking
for, and you make that final click to get it, you're not actually
talking to our website any more--you are transferred to the FTP site
you selected. Some FTP sites are near you; some are far away. Some may
be faster than others, even if they are about the same distance; some
may have temporary technical problems.

You should usually select the FTP site nearest you. If you find you're
having problems with that one, you can select another.



R.13. What exactly is an FTP site anyway?

FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol, one of the oldest and most
reliable protocols of the internet. This is the method by which a file
can be copied from one computer to another.

An FTP site, or FTP server, is a computer that holds files that people
can upload and download. In the case of PG, the Posting Team upload
our texts when they're ready to two main FTP servers,
<ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org> and <ftp://ftp.archive.org>, which serve as
our master copies.

Other FTP sites around the world automatically download the files from
these master sites, so they have a full set of PG publications for you
to download. Because they only check for updates and new files at
intervals, some FTP sites may be a day or two behind. Some FTP sites
don't have space available for everything, so they may hold only the
zipped versions of the files. But most FTP sites will have the
entire PG collection. These are called FTP "mirrors", since they are a
copy of the original.

Many FTP sites exist that offer a full PG mirror but are not on our
FTP sites list. Commonly, these are in schools, where they serve the
local students, but don't have enough bandwidth to offer downloads to
worldwide users.



R.14. Can I become an FTP mirror?

Yes! We're always looking for more FTP mirrors.

If you manage an FTP site with a few GB of space, please check our
Contact Information page <http://www.gutenberg.net/contactinfo.html>
and contact the appropriate person, who will make the arrangements for
you. If space is a problem, you can consider holding only zipped
copies of the texts. We can move you up or down the FTP site list as
you want more or less traffic.



R.15. Can I make a private FTP mirror for my school, library or
      organization?

Yes.

We like all FTP mirrors to be open to as many people as possible, but
we know that not all schools have the resources to be a public mirror,
so we welcome all mirrors.

And anyway, you don't even have to ask, because we don't control
what happens to our texts once we post them!



R.16. When I clicked on the file I want, nothing happened.

When you select a file for download, your request goes to the FTP site
you selected, not to our website. If the FTP site you selected is
having problems, or if there is the Net version of a traffic jam
between you and it, you may have problems downloading.

Select a different FTP site [R.12] and try again.



R.17. How many texts are downloaded through the web site?

We don't really do statistics, but in one particular month for which
we did, we had a figure of about 800,000 searches completed. Since the
final request for download goes to the FTP site selected and not to our
website, we can't confirm that all of these were actually downloaded,
but we expect that most people who have gone all the way through the
search will finish the job.

In another month, we had about 1,000,000 downloads of files from
ftp.ibiblio.org, our main FTP site. This does not count downloads from
other FTP sites, of course. Why are there more downloads than
searches? Because people who are already familiar with getting PG
texts can skip the website search and download straight from the FTP
sites.



R.18. What are the most popular books?

We very rarely do statistics, but on one occasion in late 1999 when we
did, we found the top author searches to be:

  1 shakespeare
  2 poe
  3 doyle
  4 melville
  5 dante
  6 joyce
  7 shaw
  8 christie
  9 conrad
 10 porter
 11 verne
 12 hemingway
 13 darwin
 14 miller
 15 woolf
 16 zola
 17 king
 18 eliot
 19 churchill
 20 smith
 21 twain

and the top individual books searched for to the point of downloading
were:

  1. Lady Susan, by Jane Austen
  2. 1st PG Collection of Edgar Allan Poe
  3. The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan Doyle
  4. Moby Dick, by Herman Melville
  5. A Christmas Carol, by Dickens
  6. The King James Bible
  7. Twelve Stories and a Dream, by H.G. Wells
  8. Stories by Modern American Authors
  9. Lock and Key Library, Magic & Real Detectives
 10. [Hans Christian] Andersen's Fairy Tales
 11. The Legend of Sleepy Hollow, Washington Irving

These numbers vary a lot. When a movie based on a classic is released,
downloads of that eBook go through the roof!




About Downloading and Using Project Gutenberg eBooks:



R.19. Should I download a ZIP or a TXT file?

If you know how to unzip a file, then downloading the zip is faster.
For some non-text eBooks that contain multiple files, like HTML with
included images, only a zip file may be available. For some other
formats, like MP3 or MPEG, there may not be a zipped version available
because the native format of the file is already compressed enough
that zipping it doesn't save much.



R.20. I've got a ZIP file. What do I do with it?

Unzip it.

If you want a free program, you could try the open source Info-Zip
software available at
<http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/tools/zip/info-zip/> for Mac, MS-DOS,
Unix, Windows and just about everything else you might have.

If you want a commercial program, PKZIP from <http://www.pkware.com>
and WinZip from <http://www.winzip.com> are among many popular
shareware utilities that allow you to unzip files.

Mac-users using Stuffit Expander may like to set a preference (File /
Preferences / Cross Platform) to "Convert text files to Macintosh format
. . . When a file is known to contain text". This gets rid of strange
characters (linefeeds), which are not wanted on a Mac, at the beginnings
of lines. MacZip is another free program for Macs. Mac users can also
try ZipIt or other shareware programs available from the Info-Mac
archives, e.g. from
<ftp://mirrors.aol.com/pub/info-mac/_Compress_&_Translate/>.




R.21. I tried to unzip my file, but it said the file was corrupt, or
      damaged.

The chances are that it didn't download correctly. Try downloading it
again. If you don't succeed the second time, try downloading the
unzipped version.



R.22. I see gibberish onscreen when I click on a book.

To save download time, our etexts are stored in zipped form as well
as text form. Zipped files are smaller, and take less time to transfer
to your computer, but you need a program to unzip them. If you try to
view a zipped file directly, it looks like gibberish.

You can recognize zipped files easily because their filenames end in
.zip.

If this happens, either make sure you're asking your browser to Save
the file rather than display it (often, you right-click the file and
choose Save) or else click on the version of the file that ends in
.txt instead of .zip. You don't need a zip program to view .txt files.

Looking at a zip rather than a text file is by far the most common
reason for this problem, but there are some others. If you're quite
sure that you're not looking at a zip file, then it could be that the
file you downloaded is in a character set that your viewer doesn't
recognize, like Big-5 [V.78] for Chinese texts, or Unicode [V.77].
If this is the case, you will have to find a viewer that works on your
computer for the specified character set. We may also have an ASCII
version of the same text available for you--we do try to have ASCII
versions for everything [G.17], but some languages, like Chinese,
just cannot be sensibly expressed in ASCII.

If you can see _most_ of the characters, enough to be able to make out
the text, but there are regular gibberish characters, black squares,
empty boxes or obviously missing characters scattered about through
words, then you are probably looking at an "8-bit" text [V.79], with
accented characters, and your viewer doesn't handle the character set.
See the FAQ "I can read the text file, but a few characters appear as
black squares, or gibberish" [R.31].

If there are a very few gibberish characters, black squares or
obviously missing characters in the text, then it's likely that this
was intended to be a 7-bit text, but a few 8-bit characters like the
British pound symbol or accented letters slipped through.



R.23. Can I download and read your books?

Yes. That's what Project Gutenberg is all about--making texts
available free to everyone!



R.24. What am I allowed to do with the books I download?

Most Project Gutenberg e-texts are in the public domain. You can do
anything you like with these--you can re-post them on your site, print
them, distribute them, translate them to other languages, convert them
to other formats, or redistribute them in unchanged form. However, if
you distribute versions under the Project Gutenberg trademark, we do
impose some conditions, which are explained in the header and/or
footer in each text.

Some Project Gutenberg e-texts have copyright restrictions. You can
still download and read these, but you may not be allowed to
reproduce, modify or distribute them. When browsing or searching on
the site, you will see these copyright-restricted texts indicated in
the listings. For fuller information about them, download the e-text
and read the header or footer of the file, which will spell out the
conditions in detail.



R.25. Does Project Gutenberg know who downloads their books?

No, and we don't want to!

Like any Internet transfer, our sites have to know the IP addresses
that contact them; without that, no communication is possible. But we
do not trace, hold or examine them beyond what is necessary to deal
with any problems or maintain logs or statistics. We never identify IP
addresses with people.

Further, we encourage people, sites, schools around the world to
mirror, or copy, our texts to their sites. Once that happens, we have
no control over them, and we never have any idea who or even how many
people access them after that.

Even further, we encourage people to distribute the texts on disks,
CDs, paper, and any other storage format they can find. We encourage
them to convert the texts to other formats, and share them.

For most people reading this, anonymity is probably not an issue, but
you may live in a place or time where reading Paine, or Voltaire, or
the Bible, or the Koran, is considered suspicious or even subversive.
We don't know who you are, and what we don't know, we can't tell.

Currently (mid-2002), by means of DRM (Digital Rights/Restrictions
Management) many commercial publishers can make a list of exactly
who is reading which of their eBooks. We _don't_ know, and we don't
_want_ to know.



R.26. I've found some obvious typos in a Project Gutenberg text.
      How should I report them?

The first thing to remember is that the people who actually make the
corrections you suggest are very experienced, and are used to seeing
lots of different types of errata reports. So the exact format of your
report isn't really very important--just get the report to us in any
clear form that we can understand.

Beyond that, here are some tips to avoid misunderstandings.

It's always helpful if you report the full title, etext number, year
and filename of the text you are correcting. We have multiple editions
and versions of some texts, like Homer's "Odyssey", and unless you
tell us exactly what text you mean, we may have to spend some time
searching and guessing.

Especially, _please_ check and report the exact filename of the text.
It is amazingly common for people to report problems with abcde10.txt,
when abcde11.txt is already posted, and has these and other errors
already fixed.

When there are only a few errors, it's usually easiest to cut and
paste the line or lines where the error is into your e-mail, with your
comment.

It can also be useful to give the line number of the place where the
error is, and some people who check texts regularly do this. If this
seems natural to you, do it; if it doesn't, don't.

An ideal report for a typical errata list might look like:

    Title: The Odyssey, by Homer
           Translated by Butcher & Lang
           April, 1999  [Etext #1728]
    File:  dyssy08.txt

 Line 884:
   back Telemachus, who bas now resided there for a month.
     "bas" should be "has"

 Line 1491:
   Ithaca yet stands. But I wouldask thee, friend, concerning
      "would" and "ask" are run together here

 Line 1563:
   in his father's seat and the elders gave place to him
      This is the end of a paragraph, and needs a period at end.

 Line 15346-7:
    'Hearken to me now, ye men of Ithaca, to the
    will say. Through your own cowardice, my friends, have
       I think there is something missing between "the" and "will"


But the following would get the job done as well:

    In Homer's Odyssey, translated by Butcher and Lang, from /etext99,
    file dyssy08.txt, I found the following errors:

    Telemachus, who bas now resided
    change "bas" to "has"

    But I wouldask thee,
    "would ask" run together

    and the elders gave place to him
    needs period

    ye men of Ithaca, to the
    will say.
    line missing between "the" and "will"?

Where there are more than a few changes, it may be easiest all round
just to submit a corrected version of the file. However, if you do
this, please do not re-wrap the paragraphs unless it is really
necessary; we need to check your suggestions before reposting, and if
the file is very different, it is difficult and time-consuming for us
to find your real changes among all of the changes in the lines.



R.27. I've found some obvious typos in a Project Gutenberg text.
      Who should I report them to?

The Posting Team, who post the books, also make the corrections, and
ultimately, the corrections need to go to them.

Many producers put their e-mail addresses in their texts, specifically
so that readers can contact them when errors are found. If you see
that in your text, you should try to contact the producer first. This
is especially true if the corrections aren't obvious, as in the case
of missing words. The producer is likely to have the original book,
and will probably be able to confirm your corrections without visiting
a library. If the book needs the corrections, the producer can then
notify the Posting Team.

If you get no response from the producer, or if there is no e-mail
address listed, or if the corrections are small and obvious, you can
send them to any or all of the Posting Team directly.



R.28. I've reported some typos. What will happen next?

This varies wildly. Sometimes, you may just get a response e-mail in a
day or three saying thanks, and that we've fixed the typo. This is
normal when you've just reported one or a few obvious typos.

Where there is some text missing, or the changes you suggest are
otherwise not obvious, we may have to find someone with an eligible
copy of the book to confirm the changes, and that might take time.
Normally, you will get an e-mail explaining that within a week.

Sometimes, even though you've noticed only one or two small typos, one
of the Posting Team who was looking at it may find many more, and
decide that the whole text needs to be re-proofed. This may also take
time.

If the text needs a lot of changes, we may post a new EDITION [R.35]
of it, with a new filename: e.g. abcde10.txt may become abcde11.txt.
In this case, you will receive a copy of the e-mail sent to the posted
list announcing the new file. Our current rule of thumb is that we
create a new edition when we make twelve significant changes, but we
judge each on a case-by-case basis, and especially will usually not
make a new edition if the original was posted recently.



R.29. I've got the text file, and I can read it, but it seems to be
      double-spaced or it has control characters like ^J or ^M at
      the end of every line.

This is most often seen on Mac or Linux. If you want to dig into why
this effect happens, see the FAQ "Why use a CR/LF at end of line?" [V.85].

Perhaps viewing it in a different editor or viewer will help, but it's
usually easiest just to globally replace all of the control characters
(if you see them) with nothing, or to replace all double line-ends
with single line-ends.



R.30. When I print out the text file, each line runs over the edge
      of the page and looks bad.

If you have a file ending in .txt from Project Gutenberg, it is
usually formatted with about 70 characters per line, and with a
Carriage Return/Line Feed pair (also known as a "Hard Return" or a
"Paragraph Mark") at the end of every line.

This is the most widely accepted format for text files, but it's not
ideal on all computers and all programs. 70 characters per line means
that if you are using an unusually large or small font to print it,
lines may wrap around or not reach across the page. The hard return
means that on some systems, the lines may appear double-spaced.

Unfortunately, we can't advise you how best to format texts on all
systems, mostly because we don't know every system! Here are a couple
of tips you might try:

If your font is too big or too small, try setting the font to Courier
size 10 or Times size 12. It may not be ideal, but it mostly works.

In a word processor, you may be able to remove the Hard Returns, but
beware! if you remove too many, the whole text will become one
paragraph. One common formula for removing the HRs goes like this:
 1. First, all paragraphs and separate lines should be separated
    by two HRs, so that you can see one blank line between them.
    Where they aren't, as in the case of a table of contents or
    lines of verse, add the extra HRs to make them so.
 2. Replace All occurrences of two HRs with some nonsense character
    or string that doesn't exist in the text, like ~$~.
 3. Replace All remaining HRs with a space.
 4. Replace your inserted string ~$~ with one HR.



R.31. I can read the text file, but a few characters appear as black
      squares, or gibberish.

The text is using some character set that your editor or viewer isn't.
For example, the text is using ISO-8859-1, and your viewer is using
Codepage 850--or vice versa. You can see the plain ASCII characters,
but non-ASCII characters like accented letters display as nonsense.

Look at the top of the file for a clue to the character set encoding:
if it's there, it may help you to find which editor, or font, or
viewer you should be using.



R.32. Can I get a handheld device for reading PG texts? Which device
      should I get?

To read eBooks on a handheld, you need three things: the eBook
content itself (which you can get from PG and other sites), a device
(which I will sometimes call a PDA, even though technically, the
RocketBook isn't a PDA) and the reader software that runs on the PDA.

In mid-2002, there are three main families of handheld devices people
use for reading eBooks: Palms, Pocket PCs and RocketBooks (or their
successor, REB1100s). In general, it is possible to use any of
these in combination with any common type of personal computer.

Palms are very common, especially when you count not just the Palm
<http://www.palm.com> itself, but PalmOS-based devices from other
manufacturers, like:

 the Franklin eBookman <http://www.franklin.com/ebookman/>,
 the Handspring Visor <http://www.handspring.com>.
 the Sony Clie <http://www.sony.com> and

Because of the number of makers of PalmOS-based devices, you can buy
them with lots of combinations of features--color screen, audio,
different memory sizes. Of course, Palms have other applications
besides eBook reading. Palms are the smallest and most portable of the
three classes, and tend to have the best battery life for travelling,
but they also have the smallest screen. Just about all reader software
will run on Palms, except the Microsoft Reader, which runs only on
Pocket PCs, but you don't need the Microsoft Reader for Project
Gutenberg eBooks.

In Pocket PCs, the Compaq iPaq is by far the most common in mid-2002.
More expensive and bulkier than a Palm, it does have a bigger screen.
Like the Palms, it can perform many functions besides reading eBooks.
Only Pocket PCs can support the Microsoft Reader, but this is not
necessary for reading Project Gutenberg eBooks. <http://www.compaq.com>

The RocketBook, and its successor the Gemstar REB1100,
<http://www.gemstartvguide.com> are quite different from the others.
These were built specifically for reading eBooks, and do not have
additional functions. They are not, technically, PDAs. Their screens
are bigger, and excellent for reading, but do not offer color. They
also don't offer a choice of readers--the dedicated reader is built-in
to the device. Both of them require the eBooks you load to be
formatted for their reader, and files made for them usually have the
extension .rb for RocketBook. The REB1100 does not come with the
RocketLibrarian, which is the program you run on your PC to turn an
etext into a RocketBook file, but people are still making .rb files,
and the RocketLibrarian is still available and popular among an
enthusiastic group of Rocket users. (The REB1200 is entirely different
from the REB1100, and, as far as we know, PG etexts cannot easily be
transferred to it.)

In summary, the Rocket/REB1100 is a dedicated reader, with a good
screen, but limited to what it does.

Palms are relatively cheap and common, with a wide range of options,
and the capacity to function as PDAs as well. They can run all
common readers except the Microsoft one.

The iPaq <http://www.compaq.com> has a good color screen, but is
bulkier than a Palm, and can run lots of readers, including the
Microsoft one, but not all Palm readers are available for Pocket PC.
Like Palms, the iPaq can do other jobs besides displaying eBooks.

Different people make different choices among these for reading their
eBooks, and they all work well; it's a matter of personal taste.



R.33. How can I read a PG eBook on my PDA (Palm, iPaq, Rocket . . .)

To read a book on your PDA, you need to get the file into a format
that your reader software understands. Each PDA reader program will
work only with a specific format of file. Some will read several
formats, but, in general, it's a jungle of competing options.

Unless you use a Rocket or REB1100, you will need to install at least
one reader program, and many veteran readers install two or three to
deal with different formats. There are many of them available. In a
recent internal poll of Gutenberg volunteers who use PDAs,

 C Spot Run <http://www.32768.com/bill/palmos/cspotrun/index.html>,
 Mobipocket <http://www.mobipocket.com>,
 PalmReader <http://www.peanutpress.com/>
 Plucker <http://www.plkr.org>

were our favored choices for reader programs.

Further, the process may be different depending on which reader
software you're using. Each format that a reader understands has one
or more converter programs that run on your PC, and turn the plain
text file into that format. So in general, you have to:

 1. Download the PG text
 2. Edit the text for the layout the converter wants (often HTML).
 3. Use the converter to create a file of the format the reader wants.
 4. Transfer the converted file to your PDA.

If all this sounds too complicated, remember that many people take and
convert PG texts into many formats, and offer them for download from
their sites. Of course, there is no guarantee that someone will have
converted the particular eBook you want, but there are lots of
options. Try Blackmask <http://www.blackmask.com>, which lists
thousands of texts already converted for Mobipocket, iSilo, RocketBook
and the Microsoft Reader.

There are many other sites that serve pre-converted PG texts.

MemoWare <http://www.memoware.com> is also a useful resource for
converted eBooks, and has lots of information, including an excellent
map of the readers and formats jungle at
<http://www.memoware.com/mw.cgi/?screen=help_format>

Tecriture <http://www.tecriture.net> hosts a service that downloads
and converts PG texts on the fly, and delivers them straight to you.

If you're "rolling your own", you'll probably need to convert our
plain texts to HTML at some point, because a lot of converters require
HTML as input, and this is a common theme in readers' explanations of
how they get texts onto their PDAs. Don't panic! You don't have to be
a HTML wizard to do this--in fact, you don't need to know anything
about HTML at all! Usually, it's just a matter of removing some line
ends and Saving As HTML. You won't get a lot of fancy markup, or
images out of thin air, but you will get the book.

One of the main things you usually have to do in making HTML is unwrap
the lines. If you're making your HTML manually, this is usually done
by replacing two paragraph marks with some nonsense marker like @@Z@@,
replacing all single paragraph marks with a space, and replacing the
nonsense marker with a paragraph mark. After unwrapping, the text can
just be Saved As HTML.

There are some applications that specifically assist with
auto-converting text into HTML:

GutenMark <http://www.sandroid.com/GutenMark> was specifically written
for the purpose, and knows enough about PG conventions to do a very
good job.

InterParse <http://www.interparse.com> is a Windows-based generic text
parser that is very easy and intuitive to use.

The World Wide Web Consortium lists some other options at
<http://www.w3.org/Tools/Misc_filters.html>

If you're using a RocketBook or REB1100, you don't have either the
choices or the confusion to deal with. One of our volunteers who uses
a RocketBook offered this recipe for getting a PG text onto a
RocketBook:

On converting to Rocket:

 1.    Download text file.
 2.    Using your utility for showing formatting, enter your word
       processing program's edit mode.
 3.    Replace all double paragraph marks with some nonsense sequence
       that can't possibly actually be there, such as @@Z@@.
 4.    Replace all single paragraph marks with one single space
       (enter).
 5.    Replace your nonsense sequence with one paragraph mark.
 6.    Convert all your double spaces to single spaces. Repeat this
       until you get "0" for how many replacements were made.
 7.    Save in HTML.
 8.    Go into your Rocket Librarian. Use "import file using Rocket
       Librarian." Go and pick up the file, which will be automatically
       converted to .rb in this process.

This sounds long, but it usually takes me under three minutes except
for a very long text. I've never taken longer than five minutes. You
can just go in and pick up the text file with Rocket Librarian, but
what you get onscreen doing this looks very odd. Steps 2-7 are not
essential, and if I'm in a hurry to read something once I might skip
them, but if it's something I know I want to keep I use them.

This formula is not ideal for poetry or blank verse--if you want to
keep the lines unwrapped, you should avoid removing the paragraph
marks.

Another volunteer, who reads on Mobipocket <http://www.mobipocket.com>
offered this suggestion:

I use the MobiPocket Publisher, available free from
www.mobipocket.com. It wants to take a HTML file as input, so the
first thing I have to do is convert my PG text to HTML.

I usually do this by running GutenMark, available at
<http://www.sandroid.org/GutenMark>. I can also do it in Microsoft
Word using the following sequence:

Edit / Replace / Special and choose Paragraph Mark twice (or, from
replace, you can type in ^p^p to get two Paragraph Marks) and replace
with @@@@. Replace All. This saves off real paragraph ends by marking
them with a nonsense sequence.

Now Replace _one_ Paragraph Mark (^p) with a space. Replace All. This
removes the line-ends.

Finally, replace @@@@ with _one_ Paragraph Mark. Replace All. This
brings back the Paragraph Ends.

Now I can Save As HTML.

GutenMark does a better job of converting to HTML than my simple Word
formula, since it recognizes standard PG features, and sometimes
Mobipocket doesn't like the HTML produced from Word--it complains of a
missing file, or doesn't recognize quotation marks.

Having got my HTML file, I open Mobipocket Publisher, choose "Project
Gutenberg", Add the File I created, and just Publish it to MobiPocket
.PRC format. Then I pick it up on my iPaq the next time I sync. The
whole process takes two or three minutes, and the results, since I
discovered GutenMark, are good.

I recently came across InterParse 4 at <http://www.interparse.com>. It
doesn't have the built-in knowledge of GutenMark, so the results aren't
as good, but it's really easy to use, and you can see the effect of your
changes onscreen as you do it. For most PG books, all you have to do is
just Open the text file and choose Options / Remove all CRLFs (Except at
Paragraph End), then Convert / Text to HTML and Save As the HTML
filename you want. Quick and painless.






About the Files:



R.34. What types of files are there, and how do I read them?

The vast majority of our files are plain text. You can read these with
any editor or text viewer or browser. Some are HTML. You can read
these with any browser.

For a full listing of other file types as of mid-2002, and how to read
them, please see the Formats FAQ [F.2].



R.35. What do the filenames of the texts mean?

PG files are named for the text, the edition, and the format type.

As of February, 2002, all PG files are named in "8.3" format--that is,
up to eight characters, a dot, and three more characters.

The first five characters in the filename are simply a unique name for
that text, for example, "Ulysses" by Joyce begins with "ulyss".

If the text has been posted as both a 7-bit and 8-bit text, then the
first character of the filename will be a 7 or an 8, to indicate that.
For example, we have both 7crmp10 and 8crmp10 for Dostoevsky's
Crime and Punishment.

The 6th and 7th characters of the name are the edition number--01
through 99. We normally start at edition 10 (1.0); numbers lower than
that indicate that we think the text needs some more work; numbers
higher than that mean that someone has corrected the original edition
10.

The 8th character of the filename, if it exists, indicates either the
version or the format of the file. When we get a different version of
the text based on a different source, we give it an a, b, c, as for
example if the text is from a different translation. Where we have
posted a text in a different format, we also add an eighth
character--"h" for HTML, "x" for XML, "r" for RTF, "t" for TeX, "u"
for Unicode are established formats. There have been some experimental